---
title: Autodesk Inc. (ADSK)
layout: default
nav_order: 223
---

# Autodesk Inc.
{: .fs-9 }

{: .label .label-purple }

Moat: 4/5

{: .label .label-blue }

Understandability: 3/5

{: .label .label-green }

Balance Sheet Health: 4/5

Autodesk, Inc. is a global leader in design, engineering, and entertainment software, offering productive business solutions through powerful technologies and services. The Company’s software models often create virtual environments for their clients.
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

[Investor Relations](https://www.google.com/search?q=ADSK+investor+relations){: .btn .btn-primary .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 .mr-2 }
[Previous Earnings Calls](https://discountingcashflows.com/company/ADSK/transcripts/){: .btn .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 }

---

{: .warning }
>The moat, understandability, and balance sheet health scores reflect a conservative evaluation to ensure a margin of safety in any assessment.



{: .highlight }
**Business Overview:**

Autodesk, a name synonymous with innovation in design and engineering, operates globally, providing a wide array of software solutions across diverse sectors, including architecture, engineering, construction, manufacturing, media, and entertainment. The company's core offerings revolve around 2D and 3D design and modeling, augmented by data management and cloud services. Autodesk's products are often the gold standard in their respective industries, and this wide product portfolio means it has a multitude of customer segments.

{: .note }
**Revenue Distribution:**

*   **Subscription Revenue:** The lion's share of Autodesk's revenue comes from subscription services, which are recurring and predictable. This revenue stream is driven by the company’s transition from perpetual licenses to a subscription-based model.
*   **Maintenance Revenue:** This segment stems from the revenue generated by providing maintenance to clients who are using their softwares, this area is significantly diminishing over time.
*   **Other Revenue:** This category, relatively small, includes revenue from advertising, training, consulting, and other product-related income.

{: .important }
**Trends in the Industry**

*   **Cloud Computing:** Cloud-based software continues to dominate the industry and is one of the most impactful trends and Autodesk is positioned well to take advantage of this. The company has cloud-based products that allow their customers to connect with others and allows for greater flexibility. 
*   **Digital Transformation:** Organizations across industries are accelerating the adoption of digital technologies. This trend has been a massive tailwind for a company like Autodesk. Companies are increasingly focusing on using softwares like Autodesk for design.
*   **AI and Machine Learning:** Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning are integrated into various design and manufacturing sectors, enhancing productivity and providing a much more precise result. Autodesk has AI capabilities and is working on integrating them further.
*   **Sustainability:** Green Design is also something that companies are increasingly focused on and Autodesk's softwares provide features for sustainable designs and projects. This increases the value of Autodesk in the eyes of their clients.
*   **Collaboration and Interoperability:** Increased emphasis on collaborative and cross-functional workflows, which involves connecting various departments, functions, and external collaborators to maximize the power of teamwork. This is an area where Autodesk can play a major role.

{: .highlight }
**What makes Autodesk Different**

*   **Broad Product Portfolio**:  Autodesk has products across a variety of sectors including Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC), manufacturing, and entertainment. It has offerings for everything from conceptual designs to complex virtual environments, which helps to capture market share across several fields. 
*   **Established Presence**: Autodesk has become a prominent force in the industries that it serves, acting as a major source of value and innovation for most of the companies that it partners with. They have a large and established history.
*   **Subscription Model**:  The company has switched from a traditional licensing model to a subscription-based one. This model provides recurring and predictable income streams, with higher customer retention and loyalty.
*  **Ecosystem and Partnerships:** They have an extended ecosystem and partnership network, allowing them to reach a broader customer base and provide more integrations with third-party softwares.
*   **Focus on innovation:**  The company has a strong focus on innovation, and they have actively implemented newer technologies such as AI, Machine learning, and IoT into their offerings.

**Financials and their Justification:**

*   **Revenue Growth:** Autodesk's revenue growth has been impressive over the past few years, driven primarily by its adoption of the subscription model and increases in recurring revenue. The total revenue for fiscal year 2024 is $5.50 billion, representing a year-on-year growth. In fiscal year 2023, they also grew revenues by 14%.
*   **Margins**: Autodesk commands excellent margins due to its software-based business model.  They have very high gross margins above 90% and a healthy operating margin of about 30%.
*   **Profitability:** The company has remained highly profitable due to its recurring revenues and high margins. The net income totaled $764.6 million, or 77% of all revenue, during fiscal year 2024.
*   **Cash Flow:** The Company has solid free cash flow from its operations. In fiscal year 2024, Autodesk generated $1.48 billion in free cash flow. They have consistently generated positive cash flows over the years and have maintained a strong cash position. This signifies the strength and stability of their core operations.
*   **Balance Sheet:** The company has a healthy balance sheet with cash holdings totaling about $1.4 billion in liquidity and debt at around 1.7 billion. This gives them considerable financial flexibility.

{: .important }
**Moat Rating: 4 / 5**

Autodesk boasts a strong, but not impenetrable, economic moat, primarily owing to:

*   **High Switching Costs:**  Many of Autodesk's products (especially those geared towards large enterprises) often become ingrained into the workflows of their clients, which would make switching costs incredibly high. It can be very costly, disruptive, and time consuming to swap from one design suite to another.
*   **Network Effects:**   The interoperability of their products and the wide availability of their file types can have network effects, as it incentivizes more and more stakeholders to utilize their softwares. This is particularly true with AutoCAD.
*   **Intangible Assets (brands, patents, IP):** With numerous established brands that are known within their respective industries, and with software patents for its innovations, Autodesk has created formidable intangible assets that help them maintain their competitive position and power of pricing.
*   **Size Advantage:** They have a huge scale and hence have many advantages over competitors.

However, this moat isn't perfect and it could be compromised by:

*   **Technological Disruption:** New tech can disrupt incumbents and cause their moat to become much weaker. Although Autodesk is working on AI, this still carries some inherent risk for the company.
*  **Increasing Competition:** The market is becoming competitive, which has placed some pressure on their margins.
*   **Pricing:** Autodesk has tried to increase prices, which has caused some backlash in certain markets.

Based on all the above, I give them a **4/5 moat rating**.

**Legitimate Risks to the Moat and Business Resilience:**

*   **Industry Disruption:** Emerging technologies or sudden shifts in industry practices could disrupt Autodesk’s market position.
*   **Pricing Pressure:** While Autodesk has a strong position, increased pricing pressures or a shift toward cheaper alternatives may affect the pricing power that they possess.
*  **Talent Acquisition:** It is necessary for Autodesk to attract and retain qualified employees to help them maintain their position in the market, which may be hard if they cannot offer competitive salaries and benefits. 
*   **Economic Cycle:**  A downturn in the general economy may cause many of Autodesk's clients to cut spending on software, which can severely harm its revenues.
*   **Cybersecurity:** The software that Autodesk produces is often used in designing highly important infrastructures, and so, this area is highly vulnerable to cybersecurity threats. A significant attack on a company's cybersecurity protocols could not only harm their operations, but also reduce the trust of customers in them.
*  **Global Turmoil**: Global events and any economic and political tensions may pose significant challenges for companies like Autodesk that operate on a global scale.
*   **Product Issues:** Any issues in their softwares can affect their performance and hurt their business. These may include issues related to integration of different softwares, and overall functionality.

{: .important }
**Business Understandability: 3/5**

Autodesk's business, while not inherently complex, can be hard to fully appreciate for people without the technical expertise in these areas. Because they have so many sectors that they work in and so many different types of softwares in each of them, that makes the company harder to understand for the average investor. Hence, their understandability is rated **3/5**. 

**Balance Sheet Health: 4/5**

Autodesk has maintained a strong financial position, despite the increasing amount of debt on their balance sheet. They are free cash flow positive and maintain high margins, suggesting that their financial position is good and has only improved with their move towards subscriptions. 
Hence, a rating of **4/5** for balance sheet health.

{: .note }
**Recent Concerns / Controversies**

*  During their Q1 2024 earning call, management noted that they have a lot of uncertainty, particularly with the macro economy. 
*  There is growing concern about their revenue recognition methodology, and customers pushing back on prices.
*  There is a slowdown of their operations in Europe due to the economic crisis.
*  They have laid off a number of employees.
* There was some negative impact of changes in currency and a decline in operating income for this quarter.

Overall, despite some negative concerns, the management is optimistic about the future, and that it will overcome the problems in the near-term. The move to subscriptions is benefiting the business greatly.
