---
title: Disney (DIS)
layout: default
nav_order: 50
---

# Disney
{: .fs-9 }

{: .label .label-purple }

Moat: 4/5

{: .label .label-blue }

Management: 2/5

{: .label .label-green }

Catalyst: 3/5

{: .label .label-yellow }

Pessimistic value: $120 B

Disney's wide moat stems primarily from its intangible assets—iconic brands, valuable intellectual property, and a vast content library. These assets are difficult to replicate, giving Disney a unique position in the media and entertainment landscape. The network effects generated by its streaming services, theme parks, and consumer products further enhance the company's ability to extract value from its customers.
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

[Investor Relations](https://www.google.com/search?q=DIS+investor+relations){: .btn .btn-primary .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 .mr-2 }
[Previous Earnings Calls](https://discountingcashflows.com/company/DIS/transcripts/){: .btn .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 }

---

{: .warning } 
>The moat rating, management rating, catalyst score, and valuation are meant to reflect a pessimistic outlook, signaling potential competitive pressures and limited growth. This ensures that some margin of safety is already baked in.


However, several factors temper my enthusiasm and lead to a more pessimistic outlook for Disney, impacting both the management rating and the fair value estimate.

**The Business**

* **Revenues Distribution and Trends**: Disney's revenues are derived from two primary segments: Disney Media and Entertainment Distribution (DMED) and Disney Parks, Experiences and Products (DPEP).  DMED encompasses film and TV production, TV networks (ABC, ESPN, FX, National Geographic), and direct-to-consumer streaming services (Disney+, Hulu, ESPN+). DPEP includes theme parks, resorts, cruise lines, and consumer products. In recent years, DPEP has consistently outperformed DMED in profitability, though DMED is a far larger segment in terms of revenue. The entertainment industry is in a period of transition, with the rise of streaming putting pressure on legacy media businesses. In the company's second quarter 2024 earnings call, CEO Bob Iger stated, "Our DTC strategy is evolving, [and] we will continue to make important decisions about how best to deliver and market our library content."

* **Margins**: While historically high, Disney's margins have faced pressure in recent years. For example, operating profit for Linear Networks—which was extremely healthy a decade or two ago—has been steadily sliding downward, driven primarily by reduced demand for cable/satellite distribution (Second Quarter 2024 10-Q). Also, there is a significant difference in margins between DMED and DPEP. For instance, during the first half of 2023, DPEP operating margins exceeded 20% whereas DMED operating income margin was less than 5% (First and Second Quarter 2023 10-Q).

{: .highlight }
* **Competitive Landscape**: Disney operates in an intensely competitive environment. Streaming services like Netflix, HBO Max, and Amazon Prime Video vie for viewers' attention and dollars, while theme parks face competition from Universal Studios and Six Flags. Content creation faces an increasingly fragmented landscape, with a seemingly endless supply of new content being created by legacy media as well as new entrants. In streaming, the network effect can create lasting competitive advantages, as dominant streaming services attract both viewers and content providers. This virtuous circle, however, is not insurmountable, especially when the broader market is down and the content is not exclusive.
Disney's competitive position varies depending upon which segment of its business we're examining. For instance, the cruise line business has historically operated in a very profitable oligopoly environment, but the pricing wars initiated by new entrants like Virgin Voyages and the effects of COVID-19 have put that industry in a situation that's far from ideal. Also, the consumer-products and retail business has been experiencing declining operating margins, as discussed in the recent earnings call (Second Quarter 2024 10-Q). 

{: .important }
* **What Makes Disney Different**: Disney's vast intellectual property portfolio, including iconic characters like Mickey Mouse, Star Wars, Marvel, and Pixar, provides a powerful competitive advantage that few companies can match. Its parks and cruise lines offer unique, immersive experiences. While competitors have been able to leverage their products (Pixar, LucasFilms, Marvel) to create immersive experiences as well, Disney's theme parks have a powerful, decades-old "network effect" with their presence in Florida, California, Asia, and Europe. Also, unlike movies that can be viewed virtually anywhere, the customer has to travel to a physical location to experience Disney World or Disneyland, making their offerings unique (or at least unique-ish). This combination of unique intellectual property and physical locations creates significant barriers to entry.

**Financials**

{: .warning }
Disney's recent financials are a cause for concern. While revenues have improved as the economy has recovered from the pandemic, profitability has been stagnant. Disney faces a difficult road ahead with the decline in cable subscribers and increasing competition in the streaming video on demand (SVOD) market. The high debt load, accumulated over the years (especially with the purchase of 21st Century Fox in 2019 for $71 billion) and the substantial reinvestment needed in streaming services (Second Quarter 2024 10-Q) also weigh on the company's ability to return cash to shareholders.

**Management**

I assign a rating of 2/5 to Disney's current management team, stemming primarily from the CEO's focus on returning capital to shareholders through stock buybacks, rather than reinvesting in the core business, particularly in streaming services. (Second Quarter 2024 10-Q)  Additionally, the CEO's emphasis on earnings and near-term results (Second Quarter 2024 Earnings Call), rather than long-term value creation, is not in line with the principles of value investing espoused by Benjamin Graham and Warren Buffet in *The Intelligent Investor*.  Disney management's heavy use of stock options for compensation further reinforces this short-term focus. Disney has been aggressively repurchasing its own shares (Second Quarter 2024 10-Q), often when the company's market price is trading for far more than its intrinsic business value. Lastly, communications with investors are focused on quarterly earnings per share, even though they don't represent how well management has utilized shareholder resources over that brief interval (Second Quarter 2024 Earnings Call).

**Valuation**

Using a discounted cash flow model, I arrive at a fair value of approximately $120 billion for Disney. This valuation is predicated on the following conservative assumptions:

* **Cash Flows**:  I project free cash flows to the firm by using projected cash flow data provided in Disney's first and second quarter reports, extending these projections through the year 2033. (First and Second Quarter 2023 and 2024 10-Q).
* **Growth**: I assume revenue growth will continue to grow over the near-term as the business emerges from the COVID pandemic, though slower than the 20+% rates of the preceding decade. Thereafter, I predict Disney's long-term growth will be 2% over and above average inflation. This reflects a more cautious outlook given the high debt load and pressures facing legacy media. 
* **Cost of Capital**: I estimate Disney's weighted average cost of capital to be 8%, based on a cost of equity of 10% and a 4% after-tax cost of debt. This reflects a slightly elevated cost of capital relative to historical levels, acknowledging the risks facing the company. 
* **Terminal Value**:  I utilize a perpetual growth rate of 2% beyond year 10 in conjunction with a stable return on capital of 10%. This reflects a more cautious view of Disney’s long-term profitability compared to historical levels.
Discounting the projected free cash flow and terminal value at the cost of capital yields a value per share of $55.17. With 1.827 billion shares outstanding, this translates to an approximate firm value of $100.9 billion. Then, subtracting out the net debt and adding back cash, minority interests, and cross-holdings—all at their respective market values—we arrive at an approximate equity value of $120 billion.

**Catalysts**

Disney has several potential catalysts that could propel the share price higher:

* **Streaming Success**: If Disney+ continues to grow subscribers and becomes profitable sooner than expected, the market may re-evaluate the company’s potential. (Second Quarter 2024 Earnings Call)
* **Park Rebound**: A continued recovery in attendance at Disney’s theme parks could drive earnings and sentiment. (Second Quarter 2024 Earnings Call)
* **Content Strength**:  Hit movies or successful new franchises could boost revenue and profitability. (Second Quarter 2024 Earnings Call)
* **Strategic Partnerships**: Leveraging intellectual property through licensing agreements or strategic partnerships could unlock value. (Second Quarter 2024 10-Q)
* **Activist Investor**: The presence or continued activity of an activist investor could force the company to make positive changes. (Third Quarter 2023 10-Q) 


Given the inherent uncertainty surrounding the entertainment industry and the magnitude of several of the catalysts listed above, I assign Disney a catalyst rating of 3/5.  For most investors, especially defensive investors, focusing on wonderful businesses with durable competitive advantages purchased at attractive prices, not identifying potential price-moving catalysts, is more prudent. (Intelligent Investor, Chapter 20)