---
title: Elastic (ESTC)
layout: default
nav_order: 884
---

# Elastic
{: .fs-9 }

{: .label .label-purple }

Moat: 3/5

{: .label .label-blue }

Understandability: 2/5

{: .label .label-green }

Balance Sheet Health: 4/5

Elastic N.V. is a company specializing in search solutions, analytics, and data visualization software, primarily known for its Elasticsearch platform. It enables its users to ingest, store, search, and analyze large quantities of data in real-time, making it a crucial tool for various applications.
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

[Investor Relations](https://www.google.com/search?q=ESTC+investor+relations){: .btn .btn-primary .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 .mr-2 }
[Previous Earnings Calls](https://discountingcashflows.com/company/ESTC/transcripts/){: .btn .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 }

---

{: .warning }
>The moat, understandability, and balance sheet health scores reflect a conservative evaluation to ensure a margin of safety in any assessment.



{: .highlight }
**Business Overview**
Elastic N.V., formerly known as Elasticsearch, is a search company providing software solutions for search, observability, and security. Its core offering is the Elasticsearch platform, a distributed, open-source search engine built on Apache Lucene, designed to handle massive amounts of data and queries. Here's a deeper look at its key aspects:

*   **Revenues Distribution:**  Elastic primarily operates through subscription-based models, with the majority of revenues derived from its Elastic Cloud services. These services enable users to access the power of Elastic products without having to manage infrastructure. The company's revenues are predominantly driven by subscriptions to their cloud offerings, though professional services and other subscriptions also contribute. While a breakdown by category of revenue is not provided, subscription seems to be the dominant source. Geographically, a majority of revenue is attributable to the US and EMEA, with APAC making up a smaller portion of the total revenue.
*   **Trends in the Industry:** The data analytics, observability, and security markets are rapidly growing due to the increasing volume and complexity of data generated by digital businesses. The demand for real-time data analysis and actionable insights is constantly increasing. Additionally, the shift towards cloud computing has led to higher growth rates for cloud-based software solutions.
*   **Margins:** Elastic typically shows high gross margins (around 75%), which are often characteristic of SaaS businesses. However, the operating margins have historically been negative, due to significant investments in R&D and sales and marketing. However, they are trending towards positive territory. The primary source of cost comes from salaries and employee benefits, with research and development remaining a significant driver of their OpEx.
*   **Competitive Landscape:** The competitive landscape is complex, with competitors ranging from established tech giants to specialized startups. Key competitors include Splunk and Datadog, among others. While some competitors may offer similar functionality within specific niches, Elastic often maintains superiority in its search and data analytics capabilities, and more robust open source software. However, the commoditized nature of some of their offerings might weaken their moat.
*   **What Makes the Company Different:** Elastic stands out for its open source software that is widely used, developer-friendly interfaces, and scalable systems. With Elastic, there are a variety of use cases and deployment opportunities. Their powerful capabilities attract enterprises with diverse needs, from site search to complex analytics to cybersecurity. Additionally, Elastic’s community and education programs help retain developers, and thus further expand the network effect.

{: .highlight }
**Financial Analysis**

*   **Revenue:** Elastic has continued to see rapid growth in subscription revenues over time. The Company’s revenues are primarily derived from its subscription services, particularly from the Elastic Cloud. In the recent reports, they reported $323.2 million in total revenue for the three months ended July 31, 2023.
*   **Profitability:** Gross margins have been solid, staying around 75%. However, its operating margins are still negative, despite improvements, largely due to continued heavy investments in sales and marketing and research and development. In the quarter ended July 31, 2023, operating losses are at ($13.9m). On the bright side, the company has become a lot more optimized and efficient, increasing operating profit margins over time.
*   **Cash Flow:** Despite the operating losses, Elastic has been generating significant free cash flow. They reported $46.1 million in free cash flow for the three months ended July 31, 2023. The company's ability to convert net losses to free cash flow demonstrates their efficient business model. This strong cash flow gives the company flexibility in terms of funding operations and possible buybacks.
*   **Balance Sheet:** Elastic has a healthy balance sheet, with $1.17 billion in cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, and with no term debt outstanding. This means that they can afford to continue investments in their business, withstand any short term downturn, and fund growth in their business.

{: .note }
**Moat Analysis: 3 / 5**

Elastic's moat can be considered a moderate one, given certain strengths and vulnerabilities.

*   **Strengths**:
    *   **Brand and Intangible Assets:** While they are not a household name, they are a respected and widely used open-source enterprise.
    *   **Switching costs:** Some clients have created workflows around Elastic’s tools, potentially creating some switching costs.
    *   **Network Effects:** Elasticsearch’s extensive open-source community and large network of users act as a kind of network effect.
*  **Weaknesses**:
   *   **Competition:** The market is competitive, with many capable alternatives.
   *   **Technological Disruption:** While their tech stack is strong and very effective currently, the tech industry is quite fluid, and they can be easily disrupted by another superior technology.
   *    **Commoditized offerings:** Some components of their business are commodity-like and have low barriers to entry.

{: .warning }
**Risks to the Moat and Business Resilience**

Elastic faces several key risks that could erode its competitive advantages:

*  **Increased Competition:** The competitive landscape in the data analytics and observability sector is becoming increasingly crowded and aggressive, which may lead to commodification of products and price pressures.
 *   **Technological Disruptions:** Technology in the sector is developing very rapidly and constantly. New players with better tech offerings can enter and destroy the value of current solutions. This could also lead to decreased pricing power of their products.
*    **Dependence on Open-Source Community:** Elastic relies heavily on its open-source community for product development and support. Changes in the community might affect the platform's stability and development trajectory.
*    **Customer Consolidation:** A significant portion of Elastic’s revenue is concentrated within a relatively small number of large customers. The loss of any of these key accounts could materially affect the company's performance.
*    **Market Volatility:** Since tech stocks tend to have more volatility than other sectors in the stock market, the company’s share price can have some volatility.

**Understandability: 2 / 5**

Elastic's business model is somewhat complex to grasp for a new investor due to the technical nature of its offerings and nuances of its services. There is a need to understand things such as search, data analytics, cloud computing, scalability and many others to deeply understand their business. However, most people can grasp the fundamentals if they don't go too much into the technical details.

**Balance Sheet Health: 4 / 5**

Elastic has a very strong balance sheet, highlighted by its large cash reserves with no long-term debt. This gives it a cushion and enables them to remain financially flexible. They may utilize this cash hoard for strategic acquisitions in the future. Also, they have a low current liabilities to assets ratio, showing that they are responsible in managing their assets and liabilities. All of these factors make them reasonably well positioned for the future. The company did take on some debt in Q4 2023, but they were quickly able to reduce it again in the last quarter.

{: .note }
**Management's Take on Recent Concerns**
During the Q4 2023 earnings call, management talked about the current economic uncertainty that many businesses are facing. Many companies have been struggling and reducing their spending because of economic headwinds. Management believes that the company is positioned to capitalize on this environment because of the value that their solutions provide for their clients. Also, the company has been seeing increased adoption of their cloud services, and a move to long-term contracts. Also, management emphasized that the slowdown in the global economy has not affected their competitive position, and they remain confident about their future plans.

In summary, while Elastic has some vulnerabilities, it possesses valuable competitive advantages which, coupled with a strong balance sheet, puts them in an excellent position. However, for a new investor, they may not understand all the aspects of their business and the industry that they are in, which increases their understandability risk. Their primary risks are market competition, technological disruption and loss of large accounts, however, they seem well positioned to continue improving on these risks. Overall, Elastic seems to be a promising opportunity for a long-term value investor.