---
title: Factset Research Systems Inc. (FDS)
layout: default
nav_order: 631
---

# Factset Research Systems Inc.
{: .fs-9 }

{: .label .label-purple }

Moat: 3/5

{: .label .label-blue }

Understandability: 3/5

{: .label .label-green }

Balance Sheet Health: 4/5

FactSet provides financial data, analytics, and technology solutions, serving a global customer base of investment professionals.
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

[Investor Relations](https://www.google.com/search?q=FDS+investor+relations){: .btn .btn-primary .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 .mr-2 }
[Previous Earnings Calls](https://discountingcashflows.com/company/FDS/transcripts/){: .btn .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 }

---

{: .warning }
>The moat, understandability, and balance sheet health scores reflect a conservative evaluation to ensure a margin of safety in any assessment.



### Business Overview
{: .important }

FactSet is a global provider of integrated financial information, analytical applications, and industry-leading service for the investment management and banking industries. It operates through three segments: the Americas, EMEA, and Asia Pacific, offering solutions for investment management, research and analysis, and financial data. The company’s offerings are primarily used by investment professionals in various roles, including portfolio managers, research analysts, and investment bankers.

*   **Revenue Distribution:**
    *   FactSet generates revenue from recurring subscriptions, professional services, and the sale of data. The majority of its revenue is derived from subscription fees, which offer stability and predictability.

    *   The Americas segment is their largest revenue region, followed by EMEA, then Asia Pacific.
*   **Industry Trends:**
    *   The financial information industry is becoming more sophisticated and dynamic, driven by increasing demand for data and analytics capabilities. A key trend here is the rise of AI and machine learning in data analysis.
    *   There is increasing demand for data integration and workflow solutions, as clients look to streamline their processes.
    *   The industry is also becoming more competitive, with a proliferation of both new and established players.
*    **Margins**
   * FactSet has consistently achieved high gross and EBITDA margins.
    * Operating Margin remains around 30% which is very impressive.
*   **Competitive Landscape:**
    *   FactSet faces competition from several large players in financial data including Bloomberg and Refinitiv, as well as niche players focusing on specific areas of the market.
    *   The industry also has many smaller players and new entrants who offer more focused products.
*   **What Makes FactSet Different:**
    *   The combination of proprietary datasets, robust analytics, and a strong focus on client service are their main differentiators.
    *   They prioritize integrating data sets, improving workflows for clients, and providing strong client service.

### Financial Analysis

*   **Income Statement:**
    *   Revenues are generated by subscriptions primarily. Subscription revenue represented 95.8% of FY2022 total revenues.
  	*   Revenues have been showing moderate growth over the last few years, which indicates they are still finding growth for their platform.
    *   Profitability is good.
        * Gross margin has remained around 81% in the last 2-3 years.
       * They have been able to maintain operating income and margins even after acquiring companies.
    *   Most of their costs go to sales & marketing, which they have been reducing to increase margins.
*   **Balance Sheet:**
    *   The company has a conservative balance sheet that mostly consists of cash and investments
    *   The amount of goodwill is increasing due to acquisitions, but goodwill, with their cash balance and consistent revenue generation, can support it.
    *  The debt-to-equity ratio was low around .2 to .3 in the last 2-3 years, implying they do not rely on debt financing heavily
*   **Cash Flow:**
    *   Free cash flow is consistently positive, and the company uses it for acquisitions, stock buybacks, and dividend payouts.
    *   Cash from operating activities continues to climb, which is very promising.

### Moat Analysis
{: .important }

**Moat Rating:** 3 / 5

**Justification:** FactSet possesses a narrow moat, built upon several key factors, but with vulnerabilities that limit its breadth and sustainability:

*   **Switching Costs (Strong):** The high switching costs are perhaps FactSet's most significant moat characteristic. Their platform is deeply integrated into the workflows of their clients and is very difficult to replace without losing a lot of efficiency and/or spending additional time and money.
*   **Proprietary Datasets and Analytics (Moderate):** FactSet maintains an extensive collection of financial data and analytics tools, which creates some level of advantage and differentiation and allows them to capture premium pricing to a limited extent.
*   **Established Customer Relationships and Reputational Advantage (Moderate):** FactSet's reputation for providing high-quality data and good client service enhances their position, especially with long-term client relationships.

However, the moat is not wide for a few reasons:

*   **Competition:** The intense competition, especially from Bloomberg and Refinitiv, has resulted in lower growth. While their offerings are different, there is always a risk of more competition eroding their moats. The low-barrier of entry makes it easy for new comers to come into the market.
*   **Limited Pricing Power:** Their pricing power, though still good is being compressed by the intense competition, so they are not able to meaningfully raise prices to earn superior returns.
*   **Technology Disruption:** There is always a possibility that AI-powered platforms, new data analysis companies, and new regulations will disrupt their business model.

### Risks to the Moat and Business Resilience

*   **Competitive Pressures:** Intensifying competition from Bloomberg and other incumbents, as well as new market entrants, could erode the market share and margins.
*   **Technological Disruption:** Rapid technological innovation and the emergence of new data analysis techniques (like AI) could render some of FactSet's offerings obsolete.
*  **Acquisition Integration Risks:** While acquisitions are key to their growth, the ability to successful integrate those acquisitions is crucial for growth and profits, and a risk here could hinder the company.
*   **Economic Downturns:** Their business is not fully recession-proof, and economic downturns could cause financial clients to curtail investments or budgets, causing a decline in revenue. However, as seen in previous earnings releases and reports, companies are still reliant on data and insights even during a recession.
*   **Regulatory and Legal Risks:** Regulatory hurdles, changing government policies, cybersecurity laws, and even trade restrictions could affect their global business and financial health.

Despite these risks, FactSet demonstrates resilience through its sticky client base, ability to adapt new technologies, and diversified revenue streams.

### Understandability Rating
{: .important }

**Understandability Rating:** 3 / 5

**Justification:** FactSet's business is moderately complex to understand for the following reasons:

*   **Industry Complexity:** The intricacies of the financial data industry, including the various types of investment professionals served and different use cases, require some familiarity with finance.
*   **Product Complexity:** FactSet offers a suite of products with different capabilities. The technology behind this is sophisticated and requires a deeper understanding.
*   **Strategic Acumen Required:** Understanding the company's competitive advantage requires a nuanced grasp of different types of moats.

Although, it is not extremely complicated business, it is not as simple as traditional consumer goods and services companies, thereby placing it on a 3/5 scale.

### Balance Sheet Health Rating
{: .important }

**Balance Sheet Health Rating:** 4 / 5

**Justification:** FactSet's balance sheet is healthy, but not perfect:

*   **Strong liquidity:** The company has a strong cash position and a low debt-to-equity ratio, ensuring sufficient liquidity to manage liabilities and unexpected downturns.
*   **Conservative capitalization:** They don't have a heavy reliance on debt funding, thereby keeping their balance sheet more stable.
*   **Good Asset Quality**: Most of their assets are cash and equivalents, which are very liquid assets.
*   **Acquisition risk:** The one area where they can improve is to acquire more carefully and make sure acquisitions create value. As it stands, the amount of goodwill is only increasing but not enough value is created. However, they have been able to sustain their profitability.

Overall the balance sheet remains healthy but can be further improved by balancing goodwill and acquisitions.
