---
title: Jefferies Financial Group Inc (JEF)
layout: default
nav_order: 692
---

# Jefferies Financial Group Inc
{: .fs-9 }

{: .label .label-purple }

Moat: 2/5

{: .label .label-blue }

Understandability: 4/5

{: .label .label-green }

Balance Sheet Health: 4/5

Jefferies Financial Group Inc. is a diversified financial services company, operating through Investment Banking, Capital Markets, and Asset Management segments, serving a global clientele.
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

[Investor Relations](https://www.google.com/search?q=JEF+investor+relations){: .btn .btn-primary .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 .mr-2 }
[Previous Earnings Calls](https://discountingcashflows.com/company/JEF/transcripts/){: .btn .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 }

---

{: .warning }
>The moat, understandability, and balance sheet health scores reflect a conservative evaluation to ensure a margin of safety in any assessment.



{: .important }
Jefferies operates in the highly competitive and volatile financial services sector and, with a few exceptions, has not shown evidence of creating strong, long-term, sustainable competitive advantages. Its reliance on short-term market fluctuations rather than deep moats for profitability is a cause for concern.

**Business Overview:**

Jefferies Financial Group is a diversified financial services firm operating globally, focusing on investment banking, capital markets, and asset management.

*   **Investment Banking & Capital Markets:** This is the core of Jefferies, handling advisory (mergers, acquisitions, restructurings) and underwriting services for debt and equity. It spans across various sectors like consumer, energy, technology, real estate, and industrials, among many others. This segment also engages in trading activities related to equity, fixed income and other related securities.
*   **Asset Management:** This part of the business provides investment management services to institutional clients and high net worth individuals, through a variety of products and strategies.

{: .note }
Jefferies, in its latest 10K, defines three key business segments within these categories which are Investment Banking and Capital Markets, which are mostly capital market activities, and Asset Management.

**Revenue Distribution:**

The company earns its revenue from the core categories explained above. Here's a look at how each segment contributed to their revenue numbers (in millions) in the three months ending February 29, 2024.

*   **Investment Banking & Capital Markets:**
    *   Net revenues of 1,323.9, which decreased 7.5%. Of this, advisory revenue of 481.0 decreased by 32.4%. The rest was comprised of underwriting revenue and trading revenue.
*   **Asset Management:**
    *   Net revenues of 86.6, which increased by 8.5%.
*   **Corporate Segment:**
     * Net losses of -213.0
*   **Total net revenues:**
     * 1,197.3

{: .note }
Net revenues are defined as revenues less interest expenses related to debt obligations. The net revenue represents the revenues generated by trading activities, underwriting, and financial advisory, reduced by related interest expenses.

**Industry Trends & Competitive Landscape:**

*   **Highly Competitive Sector:** The financial industry is crowded and competitive, making it difficult to establish lasting advantages. New market entrants also constantly increase competitiveness, in many of its sub segments.
*   **Reliance on Economic Cycles:** Earnings for firms in the financial service industry tend to swing more than most other industries. That is because this industry is closely tied to the cycles of the overall economy. There are many large institutions in finance which means more volatility due to various factors.
*    **Geopolitical and Economic Conditions:** Market and economic conditions like inflation and interest rates affect how well the company operates, and that impact can be difficult to predict.
*  **Regulatory oversight:** Jefferies must comply with extensive regulations. Any change in these regulations can affect how they do their business and their performance.
*   **Technological disruptions** also pose a threat to its business, and its existing business model.

**What Makes Jefferies Different?:**

*   **Global Presence:** Jefferies operates in many countries and caters to a diverse customer base.
*   **Diverse Portfolio:** The company operates across various segments of finance. The company can generate revenue in many different environments.
*  **Client Relationships:** Jefferies claims that it builds long-term relationships with clients that can span decades. The companies say that by providing good service they retain their customers through the decades, and that this creates consistent streams of revenue.

**Financial Analysis:**

*  **Revenues and Profits:** Revenues are very volatile for Jefferies. It does tend to be profitable, but there are periods where profits are thin and sometimes even negative for short periods. Looking at Exhibit 2 in the latest quarterly filing is a useful look to see the volatility of the firm over the last few years. It is also highly variable by business unit.
* **Expense Management:** Operating expenses also tend to fluctuate a lot, and is impacted by market conditions. For example, 2022 saw elevated expenses due to high inflation and a tough market. However, in 2023 expenses saw a slight improvement over the previous year.
* **Debt:** In the short-term, a large portion of Jefferies debt matures within one year. This may expose the company to increased financial costs if interest rates rise rapidly. However, looking at the various debt securities, their weighted average cost of debt are all over different amounts, some are 0% and some are 7.8%, but over half are under 5% (Exhibit 19). Therefore, debt is not a significant threat in the short term.
* **Capital and Liquidity:** The firm relies heavily on liquid financial instruments for its business activities. The financial condition of the firm as measured by financial metrics shows that they are in a pretty good place as seen on Exhibit 27 and 35 in the latest quarterly report.
*   **Stock Buybacks:** Jefferies repurchased shares worth 250 million, indicating management's willingness to return capital to shareholders. (Exhibit 15 in 10K)

{: .warning }
Earnings are highly volatile in the finance industry, especially investment banks. This should be a point of concern for value investors. Be wary about investing heavily on this sector as valuations are also greatly susceptible to market sentiments, and economic conditions, which makes it much harder to determine the value of these businesses.

**Understandability:**

Rating: 4/5

Jefferies' business model is fairly straightforward, especially in comparison to other firms in the financial services industry. However, to truly understand it and its position in the market, some financial knowledge is required, making it not as easily digestible for the average investor. In addition, some accounting jargon must be understood.
* Core business operations are easily understood.
* There are multiple business units, which can make the analysis hard for some.
* Its financial statements contain relatively difficult information.
* The company’s strategic intent and future growth plans were communicated somewhat well by the management.

**Balance Sheet Health:**

Rating: 4/5

Jefferies' balance sheet shows reasonable levels of leverage and liquidity, though some volatility in results. Overall, the company has a manageable debt structure and sufficient capital to meet the requirements of operations.

* Adequate capital reserve according to regulations
* Majority of assets are liquid
* Debt levels, while high, still appear to be within range of normal operations
* Earnings are influenced considerably by volatile market conditions

**Recent Concerns and Management Response:**

*  **Slowing advisory revenue**: The company cited a slowdown in advisory revenue as they are dependent on market activities, which tend to fluctuate over a period of time.
*   **Uncertain global macro conditions:**  Management have expressed concern about economic and geopolitical conditions, and how these unpredictable conditions would be affecting their performance. They have said that the conditions may continue for a longer period and that the company is well positioned to weather them. They did also say they are actively trying to lower their costs so they are well positioned to navigate this environment.
*   **Competitive pressures:** The company did mention that the industry is very competitive. They are implementing strategies to streamline their operations and reduce costs. In addition, they have said that they are focused on improving their product and services to better compete in the market.
*   **Higher compensation costs:** The company has seen a spike in costs tied to compensation due to certain factors. They have stated that they are aiming to improve efficiency and improve the quality of their services to ensure that they can justify this extra cost.
*   **Market volatility:** They have recognized that market volatility leads to lower revenue. The management intends to implement a more value oriented approach to ensure that they can navigate these turbulent market times.

{: .note }
It should be noted that, even with the above mentioned concerns, the management remained optimistic about the long-term outlook of their company, especially as economies recover and their core businesses rebound.

**Conclusion:**

Jefferies is a complex business operating in a highly competitive industry. While it has a global reach, diverse business lines, and long-term relationships with clients, these factors are unlikely to translate to any form of competitive advantage, or durable returns on invested capital, in the long-term. Thus, Jefferies has an overall rating of 2 in the moat section. The company appears to have a relatively healthy balance sheet and is a fairly straightforward company, which leads to an average of 4 for both balance sheet health and business understandability.

