---
title: Park National Corporation (PRK)
layout: default
nav_order: 1786
---

# Park National Corporation
{: .fs-9 }

{: .label .label-purple }

Moat: 1.5/5

{: .label .label-blue }

Understandability: 2/5

{: .label .label-green }

Balance Sheet Health: 4/5

Park National Corporation operates as a community banking holding company, providing financial and banking services through a diverse range of products and services, with branches mainly located in Ohio, Kentucky, North Carolina, and South Carolina.
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

[Investor Relations](https://www.google.com/search?q=PRK+investor+relations){: .btn .btn-primary .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 .mr-2 }
[Previous Earnings Calls](https://discountingcashflows.com/company/PRK/transcripts/){: .btn .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 }

---

{: .warning }
>The moat, understandability, and balance sheet health scores reflect a conservative evaluation to ensure a margin of safety in any assessment.



{: .important }
Park National Corporation (PRK), is primarily a traditional community bank. The company's revenue drivers are predominantly interest income and fee income. Interest income is generated by the difference between what the bank charges on loans and what it pays on deposits and borrowings. Fee income is generated from various service charges including loan related fees, transaction fees, and more.
 
The banking industry is typically characterized by intense competition, and it faces significant regulatory hurdles and high capital requirements. It is therefore challenging to gain a competitive advantage, and that is reflected in the low moat rating assigned to PRK.

**Moat Analysis: 1.5 / 5**
While Park National Corporation demonstrates several positive aspects that can provide it with some competitive edge, these factors are not strong enough to be translated into a wide moat or one that has strong and durable characteristics.
* **Local Relationships:** The company has a strong local presence, which allows it to understand its customers well and offer a more personalized experience, building relationships. This is particularly true for community banks that primarily operate in smaller geographic areas, fostering customer stickiness. This local connection gives PRK a slight edge against larger, nationwide banks.
* **Customer Stickiness:** As a community bank, Park National benefits from customer stickiness. Customers in smaller regions often develop long-term relationships with their local banks, making them less likely to switch. This provides a level of stability in the deposit base and revenue, but is not considered a wide moat, since it is replicable by other regional banks.
* **Operational Efficiency:** The bank has a history of efficiency with a focus on the cost side which enables it to stay competitive, however, this approach is easily replicable for other institutions. Cost efficiency without some proprietary moat element rarely results in any substantial advantage.
* **Lack of Intangible Assets:** The company does not have strong brand recognition, nor does it rely on patents or regulatory licenses to drive unique value creation, which means that the company doesn't have a way of maintaining a competitive advantage over an extended period of time.

Given these points, while Park has some positive aspects that help to stabilize its business, they aren't significant enough to be considered a moat and can be easily replicated by competitors, and hence a 1.5 moat rating.
    
**Risks to the Moat:**
Despite their advantages, there are several risks that can erode their competitive advantages:
* **Economic Downturns:** Regional banks are sensitive to local economies; any major economic downturns in the regions they serve could create challenges. For instance, defaults will increase, and the value of assets may decline. Furthermore, any prolonged period of decreased economic activities might hinder lending opportunities and growth.
* **Competition:** The banking industry is intensely competitive, with many regional and national banks vying for market share. New entrants and fintech companies will create additional competition, potentially undercutting or eroding the profit margins of existing institutions.
* **Regulatory Changes:** Regulatory changes have a huge impact on the operations of the financial industry, and it is important to take notice that the Federal Reserve Board has begun to increase the minimum equity level in the banking system and will force banks to hold more high quality assets. These regulatory changes are difficult for any bank and could reduce their profitability and potential earnings.
* **Technological Disruption:** The increasing impact of digital transformation and fintech can introduce challenges to traditional banks, because this will increase competition and consumer expectations. A failure to innovate can result in a weaker competitive position.
* **Cybersecurity Risks:** Banks store a lot of private customer information which means they are under constant attack from hackers. The increase in cybercrime will create losses and increased expenses in security.

**Business Resilience:**
* **Consistent Performance:** Park National is well-established with long-term presence in the banking industry.
* **Strong Deposit Base:** The bank benefits from a loyal customer base which is reflected in the fact that its deposit base has had consistent growth.
* **Capital Strength:** Park has been able to maintain a high capitalization ratio, as demonstrated in their Tier 1 capital, which gives them the ability to withstand financial shocks.
* **Experienced Management:** The management team has a proven track record of guiding the company throughout all the cycles.

**Business Explanation**
Park National Corporation is a community banking holding company that provides financial and banking services through a network of community banks.
{: .note }
Key aspects of the company and the financial sector include:
* **Revenue Distribution:** The main driver of the bank's revenues is the interest income from loans. The second largest revenue driver for the bank is the fee income that comes from several fees related to lending and services.
* **Industry Trends:** The financial services sector is facing challenges from rising interest rates and inflation. In addition, the banking sector faces challenges from increasing regulations from the federal government, as well as competition from fintech.
* **Margins:** The bank has recently been struggling with margins due to rising interest rates; this has been mainly offset by a rise in interest earned from loan activities.
* **Competitive Landscape:** The industry is intensely competitive and also has high regulatory hurdles and capital requirements. The main competitors include national banks, regional banks, and other financial institutions. Competition can be a risk for profitability, as a failure to adopt proper strategies may lead to a loss in revenue.
* **Differentiators:** Park emphasizes its focus on personalized service and relationships with local communities, this is a key factor for attracting customers who want to support their local financial organizations.

  **Financials**
*   **Balance Sheet Health:** The balance sheet of PRK can be considered as strong. Tier 1 capital ratio has shown improvement and is well above the level required by regulators. PRK is managing credit risk well, as shown by the consistently low levels of non-performing loans. Furthermore, the debt of the company is at manageable levels, while the leverage ratio has increased slightly but remains within the permissible levels for the banking industry. These facts make it a 4/5 in terms of balance sheet health.
*   **Profitability:** Earnings at the bank are mainly driven by the net interest margin that the company generates through lending activities. PRK is a very good bank at managing credit risk which helps them to lower their risk and provisions related to it, this is very helpful because it provides consistent profitability.
*   **Growth:** Although the growth rates for the company are good, they are nowhere near to what is typical for many software or high tech businesses. The company is a large stable bank which means that rapid growth is difficult to achieve. However, they also have the benefit of having very stable growth and revenues.

The bank has recently been criticized by some institutions to have been taking too much risk in its loans and has had increases in its delinquency rates.

**Understandability: 2 / 5**
Park National Corporation is moderately easy to understand, but there are still complexities involved that make it a 2/5 in terms of understandability. The business is a bank; its primary activity is in lending and borrowing. The balance sheets are not simple, but they are more straightforward than other more complex businesses. There also remains some complexity in the regulatory environment, and with complex metrics such as Tier 1 capital and NIM. These facts lead to a 2/5 on understandability.
