---
title: Regal Rexnord Corporation (RRX)
layout: default
nav_order: 898
---

# Regal Rexnord Corporation
{: .fs-9 }

{: .label .label-purple }

Moat: 2/5

{: .label .label-blue }

Understandability: 3/5

{: .label .label-green }

Balance Sheet Health: 4/5

Regal Rexnord is a global engineering and manufacturing company, focused on industrial powertrain solutions, power transmission components, motors, and electrical products.
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

[Investor Relations](https://www.google.com/search?q=RRX+investor+relations){: .btn .btn-primary .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 .mr-2 }
[Previous Earnings Calls](https://discountingcashflows.com/company/RRX/transcripts/){: .btn .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 }

---

{: .warning }
>The moat, understandability, and balance sheet health scores reflect a conservative evaluation to ensure a margin of safety in any assessment.



{: .important }
**Business Overview**

Regal Rexnord (RRX), formerly known as Regal Beloit, is a global manufacturer of industrial powertrain solutions, power efficiency systems, and automation and motion control solutions. They operate in a diverse set of end-markets, ranging from residential and commercial HVAC, medical equipment, to agriculture and energy production, primarily focusing on industrial applications.

*   **Revenue Distribution:** The company operates through four main segments:
     *   **Industrial Powertrain Solutions (IPS)**: designs, produces, and services highly-engineered mechanical power transmission products, including mounted and unmounted bearings, couplings, mechanical power transmission components, and gearboxes.
    *   **Power Efficiency Solutions (PES)**: focuses on products to increase efficiency, reduce power consumption, and create a more energy efficient landscape using power transmission products including AC and DC motors, drives, and alternators. 
    *    **Automation & Motion Control (AMC)**: integrates motion control systems and electrical components to deliver automation solutions. It is involved in industries including food and beverage, agriculture and building automation, robotics, and other general industrial equipment. 
    *   **Industrial Systems**: designs and manufactures a variety of engineered solutions, including specialized components for industrial applications, including power transmission, material handling, metalworking, mining, agricultural, and chemical industries.
   
   *  Revenue is generated by selling these products either directly to OEM (Original Equipment Manufacturers) or to their existing distributors.

*  **Industry Trends:** There are several trends shaping the landscape in the markets RRX operates:
     * Demand for efficient, reliable and flexible automation systems and components has been on the rise. 
     * The transition to automation and power efficiency in the industrial space has created tailwinds.
     *  The move toward energy efficiency and sustainability is a major focus.
     * The company benefits from a global network and its presence in a wide range of industries. 
   
*   **Margins:** In recent quarters, Regal Rexnord’s profit margins have been under pressure due to inflationary pressures and supply chain disruptions.
      * The company’s gross profit margins have been hovering in the 30-34 percent range
     * The operating margins are much more volatile.
    *  The company's operating margins in the most recent quarter dropped below the 15% mark (13%).

*   **Competitive Landscape:** RRX operates in a competitive environment with several large competitors such as Rockwell Automation, Siemens, and ABB. These companies vary in size and product offerings. 
     *  The industry is characterized by a mix of consolidated larger players and smaller niche competitors. 
     * In the electrical power and motion control segment, companies such as Emerson Electric and Nidec, offer similar products, making competition high in that market.

{: .new }
**What Makes RRX Different:**

*  RRX has a very wide range of products and a strong global presence.
*   The company is highly engineered and offers customization to suit customer needs.
*   RRX is also working on products to improve power efficiency, which can benefit the global transition to a more sustainable world.
*    The company has a unique business model that has shown stability across various regions.
 *   The company has adopted a "performance driven, not operations driven" approach, focusing on sales growth and efficiency metrics, over short term fluctuations.

{: .important }
**Moat Analysis:**

Regal Rexnord's competitive advantage isn't overwhelmingly strong. Here's the breakdown:
*   **Intangible Assets (Brand and Patents):** While Regal Rexnord has brands, patents, and proprietary designs, they do not appear to provide a significant moat. Competitors can copy these designs and new brands are fairly easy to introduce.
*  **Switching Costs:** Switching costs exist in specific situations, such as large customers integrating RRX’s products into existing processes, but most customers do not have significant costs to switch.
 * **Network Effect:** There is no network effect in most of its product offering.
  * **Cost Advantages:** They are working on improving costs and manufacturing by restructuring, but it's difficult to say whether these cost savings will translate to a wide moat. This cost advantage is unlikely to be a moat, as low-cost sourcing is readily available globally for many manufacturers.
  
Based on these considerations, I give Regal Rexnord a **Moat Rating of 2/5.** It has some presence and scale in the industry and some switching costs but that is not sufficient to protect the company from competition and new entrants.

**Risks That Could Harm the Moat:**
*   **Rapid Technological Changes:** Rapid technological advances could quickly undermine the company’s current competitive position. The pace of innovation is particularly high in the power efficiency and automation market, creating an ongoing threat.
*   **Competition:** The intense competition and price sensitivity of many industries in which RRX operates could easily erode margins, especially as competitors develop similar or substitute products and offer them at lower prices.
*   **Supply Chain Disruptions and Inflationary Pressures**: Recent issues with cost inflation and supply chain instability have impacted the company's margins, and could continue. A recession or other economic turmoil could hamper profitability and revenue.
*   **Integration Risks**: The recent acquisition of Altra motion had a lot of benefits and some potential risks including integration delays, lack of synergies, and unexpected costs. 

**Business Resilience:**

*   **Cyclical Nature:** RRX operates in highly cyclical markets that are affected by industrial investment. A major slowdown can significantly hurt RRX’s growth.
*  **Diversified Operations:** The company’s business is somewhat diversified across different industries and geographies, which can help the company withstand slowdowns in any particular industry or region.

{: .important }
**Financial Analysis**

*   **Balance Sheet Health:** RRX has a good overall financial position. The company has $1.4 billion in cash and marketable securities on hand against a $6.4 billion debt. This is a reasonable balance, and given the companies ability to generate cash, the long term debt position is not concerning. However the debt-to-equity ratio is a little high and is an area that should be kept in check. I give RRX's balance sheet a score of **4/5**
  *  Short-Term Liquidity: The company has a comfortable current ratio, indicating sufficient short-term liquidity.
   *   Solvency: The debt-to-equity ratio remains high, but is within manageable levels. 

*  **Recent Performance:** In the recent quarter, the company was able to increase its sales and EPS year over year and beat analysts expectation, but the operating profit decreased due to margin pressure from input costs, which is worrying.
* **Profitability:** The company’s operating profitability has been declining and is relatively low, given that the company operates in high margin markets, which means that the company is losing some pricing power.
   *    Operating expenses and interest expenses form a large portion of the company's revenues, especially after the Altra acquisition.
  *   The company has taken steps to improve operating efficiency, however it will take some time to show improvement. 

{: .important }
**Understandability Rating: 3/5**
The business is complex to understand, given its multiple segments, operations in numerous countries, and the various financial instruments being used. A detailed analysis, such as mentioned in this report, will be required by an investor to understand and assess the company properly.

### Conclusion
Regal Rexnord is a complicated business operating in multiple sectors with both tailwinds and headwinds. It has significant strengths in its global presence and diversified products, but the competitive landscape and commodity prices create a constant threat. While long term performance and returns are decent, the short term profitability has been affected, with a potential of recovery.