---
title: SS&C Technologies Holdings, Inc. (SSNC)
layout: default
nav_order: 620
---

# SS&C Technologies Holdings, Inc.
{: .fs-9 }

{: .label .label-purple }

Moat: 3/5

{: .label .label-blue }

Understandability: 4/5

{: .label .label-green }

Balance Sheet Health: 4/5

SS&C Technologies Holdings, Inc. is a global provider of software and software-enabled services to the financial services and healthcare industries.
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

[Investor Relations](https://www.google.com/search?q=SSNC+investor+relations){: .btn .btn-primary .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 .mr-2 }
[Previous Earnings Calls](https://discountingcashflows.com/company/SSNC/transcripts/){: .btn .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 }

---

{: .warning }
>The moat, understandability, and balance sheet health scores reflect a conservative evaluation to ensure a margin of safety in any assessment.



{: .important }
**Business Overview:** SS&C Technologies Holdings, Inc. (SSNC) operates within the financial and healthcare industries, offering a wide array of software solutions and technology-enabled services. These can be broadly categorized as:

*   **Software Enabled Services:** These include providing managed services, data processing and reporting, tax and regulatory compliance, and other customized services. 
*   **Software and Maintenance:** SS&C also provides software licenses, implementations, and ongoing maintenance and upgrades, focusing on portfolio management, accounting, tax compliance, reporting and client communications

**Industry Landscape:**

*   The financial services industry is marked by increasing regulation, demanding more sophisticated technology solutions for compliance and data security.
*   The healthcare industry needs scalable and integrated software to manage patient data, claim processing, compliance, and operational efficiency.
*   A trend for both financial and healthcare companies is toward cloud-based, software-as-a-service (SaaS) solutions that provide flexibility and are able to grow with clients’ needs, as well as data-driven solutions that help clients optimize their workflow and improve efficiency

**Competitive Landscape:**

*   The market is competitive with other providers offering similar solutions but SSNC has gained some major players in their customer base such as State Street, Fidelity, and BNY Mellon. The barriers to entry are moderate, due to high software development costs and the need for robust industry knowledge.
*   The company competes with both specialized software providers and larger tech companies offering broad-based solutions.
*   The industry is seeing consolidation as bigger players acquire smaller ones to strengthen their product portfolio.

**What Makes SSNC Different?**

*   **Global Presence:**  A key differentiator is their reach in all geographic regions. With offices all over the world, SSNC has a lot of diversification which can give them an upper hand in a complex global world.
*   **Full Suite of Solutions:** They offer a full suite of services that cover a wide range of customer's requirements. They operate in multiple sectors offering a unique value proposition.
*   **Long-Term Client Relationships:** SSNC prioritizes building long-term client relationships with many multi-year contracts, resulting in a high degree of customer stickiness.
*   **Integrated Platform:** The company's solutions are designed to integrate and enhance clients' existing processes rather than needing to be replaced completely.

{: .important }
**Financials In-Depth:**

*   **Revenue Distribution:** Revenue is primarily generated by software-related services, accounting for nearly 90% of overall revenue. This includes license fees, implementation, and recurring service revenue. The remainder comes from software product sales.
*   **Margins:** SSNC generally maintains healthy gross profit margins ( around 70% )  as their software business allows them to avoid additional costs of physical goods. The operating margin is relatively lower at around 20% as the company has to maintain high staff expenses. They have had some dips in recent operating margins because of acquisitions but it has shown to be relatively stable overall.
*   **Revenue Growth:** While SSNC revenues have grown quite steadily over the last couple of years and have more than doubled compared to 2010 level, growth over the last couple of years was muted to around 6-8 percent per year, largely due to some of their acquisitions. The management expects to grow between 5-7% annually going forward in the medium term.
*  **Operating Income and Expenses** In recent years and the current reporting year (2023), SS&C has a similar growth rate compared to the previous years. The recent operating expenses were 1502 million versus 1379 million last year. There has been a slight growth in cost of service from 1201 million to 1312 million and there has been an increase in sales and marketing, general and administration, and technology expenses.
*   **Debt:** The company has a decent amount of debt which has been used to fund its acquisitions, but this has been showing to stabilize in the recent years. The company seems to have good free cash flow which will allow them to decrease debt. The debt level is similar to the average for their industry.
* **Cash Flow** Operating cash flow has generally grown over the past couple of years. 2022 operating cash flow was approximately 1.65 billion which rose to 1.87 billion in 2023. The free cash flow is also at similar levels.

**Moat Analysis: 3/5**

*   SSNC has a moderately defensible moat, based on a combination of switching costs and intangible assets. 
*   **Switching Costs:** The high level of integration of their software into clients' daily operations, and the risks associated with changing to a new provider creates significant switching costs. This makes their customers sticky and unlikely to switch even in the face of price increases or if competitors are offering a similar product with better incentives.
*   **Intangible Assets:** There is a level of stickiness associated with the name which has proven to serve some benefit to customers by offering quality software. They also have a lot of financial data on their platform which is not easily replicable and thus offers a competitive advantage.
*   However, this moat is not as strong as some other companies. The financial industry is very competitive and there are many players that may also have similar offerings as SSNC. The pace of technology is also very fast-changing, so SSNC has to constantly upgrade their technology. New competitors have to provide a lower cost option for customer to choose to use their platform instead.
*   Overall, their moat is relatively stable, and for some time, their current position and brand recognition will benefit them in the financial services market.

**Legitimate Risks that could harm the moat and business:**

*   **Technological Obsolescence:** The financial and healthcare industries are fast-evolving and rapidly changing. New companies will try to innovate and come out with more modern software and if SSNC falls behind, they might see their moat erode.
*   **Data Security Breaches:**  Both financial and healthcare industries are prone to data security breaches. If they aren't able to maintain a safe and secure network, that could lead to severe disruption to their business.
*   **Regulation Changes:** Increasing regulations may be both boon and bane for the company. Though it can increase costs for clients and thus require them to hire SSNC as it offers a reliable service and technology, it may also lead to the companies' profitability dropping, and reduce the value for the owners.
*   **Dependence on Key Contracts**: Many of SSNC's revenue streams are from specific large-scale deals. This poses a risk to if any of the clients leave the company.
*  **Acquisition Integration:** With constant acquisitions, it may be difficult to integrate all of them quickly enough which can reduce the overall efficiency of the company.

**Business Resilience:**

*   The diversified and broad array of business operations as well as their long-term contracts show that SSNC is resilient enough to withstand any short term impact on their business. The company is also very financially stable with enough cash flows to support its acquisitions.

**Understandability Rating: 4/5**
Though the company offers a multitude of services in two different sectors, these are mostly in software and financial industries. Investors with any sort of knowledge or understanding of these two areas would be able to quickly grasp the basic fundamentals of the business. There are some accounting terms and the model for calculating earnings can be complex. I would give this a rating of 4, not too easy but not impossible to understand for someone who is in the industry.

**Balance Sheet Health Rating: 4/5**
Though the company has a debt of 8 billion, but their cash and overall cash flows are substantial enough to compensate for that, giving the company a solid balance sheet. They have been showing increased revenues with good margins which shows signs of future potential. The company's debt levels have been relatively consistent, which also show that the company's is not taking on too many risks. The company also has good working capital, assets to liabilities, and high revenue numbers which all mean that the company has good balance sheet health and it's rated 4 in that category.

{: .important }
**Recent Concerns/Controversies and Management's Response:**

*   **Economic Downturn:** Management has acknowledged some concerns around economic downturns, as these can affect some clients' ability to spend on their services and software. However, the company's robust business operations and diversified revenue stream make it resilient to such impacts. They also believe their solutions are of high importance to their clients and so they won't be willing to cut their services.
*   **Acquisitions**: There have been worries about the company's ability to integrate acquisitions. Although the company has made great progress in this area, it is still a major concern. The management has outlined they have a robust integration strategy in place to minimize and mitigate risks
*   **Competition**: The competitive nature of the industry has been discussed before but it still remains a main talking point. There are more companies and new technologies coming out every year and so the company needs to invest a lot in R&D to keep up with all the innovations.

## 
